---
title: Some Personal Rules for Effective and Efficient Meetings
summary: Personal propositions for having more effective meetings
date: 2016-11-07
---

I am in a situation where I spent more time in meetings now (o_O), so
naturally I have started to look for ways to get more out of these
meetings and spend less time in them. This information is nothing new,
it is a personal proposition that I want to strive for and making
it public just makes that a bit more effective.

## Make a plan and stick to it

All of the points I am trying to stick to come from answering some
common sense questions (e.g.  why are we having this meeting) and a
good preparation of the meeting. Failing to prepare is preparing to
fail as they say.

  1. Have a clear objective for the meeting and let everyone know it.

     It is amazing how many meetings are held without having a clear
     objective. I try to get a clear statement what the objective
     is (or formulate it) and have that all the attendees know. This
     alone often gives a great focus to the meeting.

  2. Communicate an agenda before hand.

     Similarly, having an agenda before the meeting allows everyone to
     prepare or have additional points scheduled. Having a clear
     agenda also allows to have a schedule during the meeting so that
     the allotted time does not run out while only 20% of the topics
     have been discussed.

  3. Stay on topic, follow up on other points later.

     Invariably, while discussing things more topics and questions
     come up, which are not directly related to the objective of the
     meeting. Cutting these off and moving them to follow on
     discussions while not being rude is always a big challenge, but
     meetings can meander very aimlessly if it is not done.

  4. Make it short and stick to the schedule.

     Scheduling a short but realistic time is key to not having the
     meeting be too long. I often find this to be a challenge. There
     is always one more thing to discuss and staying on schedule often
     requires a hard step on the break. Having another committment
     directly after the scheduled meeting time helps me in having the
     necessary motivation for keeping the meeting on schedule.

  5. Sent a follow up of the results.

     Sending out an email with the key points discussed and agreed
     upon is very helpful in keeping everyone on the same page and to
     create some documentation of discussions and decisions
     made. Ironically, it often feels like a waste of time to do this
     when one has already spent what seems like too much time in a
     meeting, but if it was worth having the meeting (and why have, it
     if not), then shouldn't it be worth to document the main outcome?
     Follow ups are also great for defining next steps for points that
     where deferred during the meeting (see 3) and make doing so more
     credible.


## Getting things done when you're only a grunt

It might seem like you can do most of these things only if you're high
up in the hierarchy or running the meeting. However, while this will
certainly make things easier, often you can get quite far with a few
tricks. Asking questions like "what is our objective for this
meeting?" or "is it possible to get an agenda before hand?"  will
usually be answered positively. Cutting your higher ups off when they
go off topic is a bit more risky of course, but politely asking if
this discussion can be continued afterwards is often still OK. In the
same vein, annoucing "I really have to leave on time b/c of XYZ" when
the meeting starts can also help to keep things on schedule. In the
end most people have been in too many meetings that have taken up too
much time that there is usually strong support for such measures.

## Some first experiences

I've only started these practices recently, but so far the results are
very encouraging. First, some meetings are not necessary: sending an
upfront email with the objective and a thought out first attempt at a
solution is often enough to render a meeting unnecessary. Sending out
a follow up is also great for keeping everyone on the same page of
what was discussed, to be able to look things up later and to create
follow ups if necessary. The biggest challenge so far is to keep
things short and to avoid off topic discussions. My best plan so far
is to schedule things with short but realistic time slots back-to-back
so that overrunning is not an option.
